---
title: "Introduction to viewport units"
date: "2023-03-12"
categories: 
    - "Front End"
    - "CSS"
    - "viewport units"
---

## Introduction to viewport units

Using viewport units (`vh`, `vw`, `vmin`, and `vmax`) in CSS is a powerful tool that allows you to create responsive designs that scale dynamically with the size of the user's screen. This post will discuss the ideal use of `vh` and `vw` values in CSS.

## Understanding `vh` and `vw` values

First, let's understand what `vh` and `vw` values are. `vh` stands for "viewport height," and `vw` stands for "viewport width." These units represent a percentage of the height or width of the user's screen, respectively. So, for example, if you set an element's width to 50vw, it will take up 50% of the screen's width.

## Issues with `vh` on mobile devices

While `vh` and `vw` are great units for scaling elements relative to the viewport size, they can cause issues on mobile devices where the screen's height is limited. When using `vh`, it's essential to remember that it can cause content overflow on smaller screens. To avoid this, use media queries to adjust the styling accordingly.

## Difference between `width`: `100%` and `vw`

It's important to note that `width: 100%` sets the `width` of an element to `100%` of its parent container, whereas `vw` sets the width to a percentage of the viewport size, so if you want an element to take up the entire width of its parent container, use width: 100%. If you want the element to take up a percentage of the screen's width, use `vw`.

## Ideal use of vmin and vmax for padding and font sizes

`vmin` and v`max` are great for adjusting padding and font sizes based on the viewport size. For example, if you set an element's padding to 5vmin, the padding will adjust as the viewport size changes, ensuring that the component remains proportional. Similarly, you can use vmax to adjust the padding relative to the larger viewport dimensions.

## Best practices for typography with viewport units

For font sizes, `vw` can be used to increase or decrease the font size based on the viewport size. However, it's best to use em for typography since it's relative to the parent element's font size. Using `vmin` for titles is also a good idea since it shrinks as the viewport gets smaller but grows until one viewport dimension becomes smaller. It stays proportional, which is essential for maintaining the visual hierarchy of your design.

## In conclusion...

In conclusion, viewport units are a powerful tool for creating responsive designs that scale with the user's screen size. When using `vh` and `vw`, be mindful of the limited height on mobile devices and use media queries to adjust accordingly. Additionally, `vmin` and v`max` are great for adjusting padding, while `vmin` is id`eal` for titles. Using these units wisely allows you to create beautiful and functional designs that look great on any device.