---
id: "0002"
title: "CSS units: em's and rem's"
date: "2023-02-04"
categories: 
    - "Front End"
    - "CSS"
---

## em's and rem's

Source: [Kevin Powell: em's and rem's explained](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_-aDOAMmDHI&feature=youtu.be)
Codepen: [Kevin Powell - A look at some CSS units](https://codepen.io/kevinpowell/pen/RKdjXe)

## Core concept

When using `em`'s to set **font size**, it's set **relative to the parent element's font size**.
When using `em`'s for **spacing attributes (margin, padding)**, it's set **relative to that element's font size**.

## `em`

Font sizes in `em`'s are set **relative to the parent element's font size**.
One `em` equals the parent's font size, often defaulting to 16px. With no parent font size, it defaults to the `body`'s font size (16px).

`em` uses **compounding**, meaning font sizes compound going down the DOM tree.

For example, a grid parent element with `font-size: 2em` and a child element with `font-size: 2em` will have a child font size of `4em` **because it's 2 times the parent's font size**.

## `rem`

According to MDN, `rem` exists to fix `em`'s **compounding** problem. `rem` means **root em** and is relative to the `html` element's font size (or `::root`), not the `body`. This makes `rem`'s more consistent.

## Using `em`'s and `rem`'s for spacing

For `margin`, `padding`, or other properties besides font size, `em`'s look at the **element's own font size** instead of the parent element.

```
    h1 {
        font-size: 2.5em;
        /* 👆 margin relative to its own font size, not its parent */
        margin-bottom: 1em;
    }

```

However, `rem` always looks at the **root font size** and is more consistent.

### Pro tip

Use `rem` for font sizes to avoid compounding issues.

## When are `em`'s most useful?

`em`'s are useful for buttons. Setting `padding`, `margin`, etc. on a button with `em`'s lets you easily adjust these properties by changing the **font size**.

```
.btn {
    display: inline-block;
    padding: 1em 3em;
}
.btn--small {
    /* 👇 Uses font size to adjust .btn--small's padding relative to .btn's (0.5 of 1 and 3 em) */
    font-size: 0.5em;
}

```

Using `em`'s often makes designs more adaptable. However, use `rem` to keep spacing consistent (equal left and right spacing).

## `em`'s and media queries

Adjusting the font size with media queries makes designs more adaptable to screen sizes.

```
html {
    font-size: 16px;
}

@media (min-width: 700px) {
    html {
        font-size: 25px;
    }
}

```