---
title: "Marketing in an entrepreneurial context"
date: "2023-03-12"
categories: 
  - "Entrepreneurial marketing"
---

# Crane, Ch.1: Marketing in an entrepreneurial context

> The actual purpose of an enterprise is the creation and retention of satisfied customers. - Peter Drucker
> 

<aside>
💡 Key concept in marketing → Discovering customer needs and satisfying them.
</aside>

## Marketing: Defined

Do not confuse marketing with advertising, selling, or common sense.

Be wary of the many misconceptions about marketing, including many negative ones.

### The 7 steps in the Marketing Process

1. Identify and understand customer needs.
2. Develop products, services or experiences to meet those needs.
3. Price the products, services, or experiences effectively.
4. Inform customers that these products, services or experiences exist.
5. Deliver the products, services, or experiences efficiently and conveniently for the customer.
6. Ensure customer satisfaction during and after the exchange process.
7. Build long-term relationships with the customers.

### Why Marketing in New Ventures Is Different

- The entrepreneur must use marketing to identify new products, services or experiences to market to new customers and not simply use it to sell existing products and services to existing customers.
- The entrepreneur must use marketing to obtains his or her “first customer” (gain the first dollar of business) and not simply manage an existing customer base.
- The entrepreneur must use marketing to build a new brand and not simply manage an existing brand.
- The entrepreneur must use marketing to establish effective marketing channels of distribution and not simply manage existing distribution methods.
- The entrepreneur must use marketing to establish initial price points for his or her offerings and not simply manage current prices for existing offerings.
- The entrepreneur must use marketing communications to persuade customers to try his or her offerings and not simply remind customers to continue to buy.
- The entrepreneur, because of resource scarcity, must find creative ways to leverage his or her marketing efforts, especially early in the venture startup phase.

## Using Marketing to Discover and Satisfy Customer Needs

As an entrepreneur you need to be persistent and creative to uncover customer needs: 

**Start with**

One of the best ways to do so is to go into the market to talk with and listen to customers → “the voice of the consumer” → Voice of consumer research

**Then**

After discovering customer needs → design business to satisfy those needs.

<aside>
💡 Delivering customer satisfaction is a key imperative for venture success

</aside>

Focus on a specific group of potential customers  → **market segmentation** → **target market → marketing offer** designed to appeal to the **target market** and satisfy its **needs → marketing mix**

M**arket segmentation:** placing customers into groups (segments) that:

1. Have common needs and,
2. Will respond to a specific marketing offer.

**Marketing mix**

For Product-Based ventures → **5Ps** (product, price, promotion, place and people).

For Service-Based ventures → **8Ps** (product, price, promotion, place, people, physical evidence, process and productivity).

### The 5Ps of Product-Based Ventures

**Product:** The product to satisfy the customer’s needs.

**Price:** The cost to the customer.

**Promotion**: The means of communication between you and the customer.

**Place**: The means of getting the product into the customer’s hands.

**People:** The individuals who will work with you and your venture.

### The 8Ps of Service-Based Ventures

**Physical evidence:** The “tangibles” that surround your service.

**Process**: The way the service is created and delivered.

**Productivity:** Balancing service output with service quality.

### Market Fulfillment Versus Market Creation

**Market fulfillment**: The entrepreneur enters an “existing market” and uses the conventional marketing process.

**Market creation**: Creating a new market that did not currently exist.

### How Social Media is Changing the Entrepreneurial Game

Many components of social media:

1. Social platforms - the social networks/communities created by individuals and/or organizations.
2. Social content - the blogs, photo, audio and video sharing offered on these platforms.
3. The overall social interactions taking place among members on these platforms.

<aside>💡 Erik Qualman’s *socialnomics* - where customers no longer search for products or services but rather find them via social media</aside>

## The External Marketing Environment

Businesses do not operate in a vacuum. There are factors and forces beyond the entrepreneur’s control. These are classified into 5 groups: social, economical, technological, competitiva and regulatory forces. 

Successful entrepreneurs evaluate these forces to determine what business opportunities such forces might provide and continue to monitor these forces to determine how best to adapt their businesses to survive and grow.

To capitalize on the opportunities created by these five factors, the entrepreneur needs to align the enterprise with them. (e.g. rise of obesity in America → ‘plus size’ clothes).

### 5 Forces in the Entrepreneurial Marketing Environment

**Social Forces.** Social forces include the characteristics of the population, as well as its value and its behavior. Changes in these forces can have a dramatic impact on what opportunities are available to the entrepreneur. A **second social force is culture**, cultural changes affect consumer attitudes and values. (e.g. *time poverty* → delivery services, online shopping; *experiential culture* → travel, entertainment and dining services).

**Economic Forces.**   Macroeconomic factors (e.g. economic growth) affect business and consumer spending. Microeconomic factors include market demand, consumer’s acquisitive power

**Technological Forces.**   New technologies change the way customers shop and what they buy. Technology enable entrepreneurs to create new or improve businesses. The internet has opened up global marketing opportunities and the rise of global markets without the constraint of physical or geographic boundaries.

**Competitive Forces.**    Competition should be considered broadly as an alternative that could satisfy a specific customer’s needs. This can range from pure (direct) competition to total budget competition. In the US in terms of competition most industries and markets are highly competitive so the entrepreneur has to determine “how to compete” and “how to differentiate”. **Competition** is an external force that will affect the type of business you will build and the competitive strategy you craft (e.g. small startups can’t compete on **pric**e**,** so they emphasize **performance** or **customer service**).

**Regulatory Forces.**    Regulatory forces influence the **nature** and **scope** of opportunities in the marketplace. Regulations consist of **restrictions** that local, state, and federal laws place on business with respect to **conduct** of its activities. Both regulation and de-regulation can provide opportunities. (e.g. EPA enacted stronger regulations → new technologies to ensure compliance).

### Environmental Scanning

**Environmental scanning** is the process of continually acquiring information on the external marketing environment to identify and interpret potential trends that may lead to entrepreneurial business opportunities. Many refer to the process of environmental scanning as *trendspotting* 🙄.

A **trend** is the specific or genera direction that a society is headed, which transforms things from what they are today to something different in the future. Trends influence the way people live and work.

🤢 Recommendations to become a better *trendspotter:*

- *Adjust your reading, listening and viewing habits*. (e.g. Broad-based reading to discover societal trends)
- *Network with the right people*. Staying engaged with knowledgeable and informed individuals and your community.
- *Be self-observant*. Spend time discovering what makes you tick, what is important and what challenges or problems you face.
- *Challenge your assumptions*. (e.g. Societal traditions)
- *Spend time watching and talking to customers*

<aside>
🤣 “Good environmental scanners not only interpret trends but also act on trends that offer the best business opportunities.”
</aside>

### An environmental scan of the United States

| Social | - Growing ethnic diversity
- Aging
- Time poverty
- Value consciousness
- Eco-consciousness |
| --- | --- |
| Economic | - Growth in electronic commerce economy
- Shift toward an experience economy |
| Technological | - Diffusion of digital and mobile technologies
- Growth in biotechnology and nanotechnology
- Advances in medicine and medical treatments |
| Competitive | - Increase in global competition
- Emergence of China and India as global competitors
- Mergers and acquisitions to improve competitiveness
- Emergence of entrepreneurial enterprises |
| Regulatory | - Increased protection for intellectual property
- Increased emphasis on free trade
- Deregulation to encourage competition |

## Key Takeaways

- Marketing is very important for entrepreneurial success.
- Use marketing to find a “market pain” and craft a unique way to cure it. Or create a new market.
- Accept the reality of social media era and learn to harness it for entrepreneurial success.
- Use marketing to zero in on the “right customer” → target market
- Go talk and listen to customers (obtain the voice of the consumer)
- Become an environmental scanner and discover truly sustainable marketing opportunities.