---
title: "Entrepreneurship and market conventions"
date: "2023-03-12"
categories: 
  - "Entrepreneurial marketing"
  - "MBA"
---

# Entrepreneurship and market conventions

## Marketing

Businesses' long-term survival depends on customers purchasing a sufficient volume of products or services at a price that generates total revenues exceeding total operating costs. Achieving this is easier when the firm fully comprehends customers' specific needs and can make available products or services that deliver greater satisfaction than equivalent offerings from competitors.

The activities associated with understanding and satisfying customer needs constitute the basic elements of the management function known as **marketing**.

**Mass marketing**.The philosophy popularized by companies such as Procter & Gamble and Coca-Cola after the Second World War of achieving a high market share, investing heavily in building customer awareness, and exploiting mass production.

**Tedlow's (1990)** generic guidelines concerning effective strategies for establishing successful mass-market brands:

1. Exploiting the economies of scale associated with mass production to generate high absolute profits by selling large volumes of low-margin goods.
2. Reinvesting generated profits in high levels of promotional activity as a mechanism through which to shape and mold market demand.
3. Vertical integration of raw materials, production operations, and products delivered to the customer.
4. Creating "economies of scale barriers."

Alfred **Sloan’s** *classicist* approach to business

The secret of successful management is grounded in the concept of applying rational planning to achieve the single-minded goal of maximizing profits (i.e., analytical planning models as a path to optimize organizational performance).

Early market management theory echoed the theme of rational planning models. The model recommends customer research as the entry point through which knowledge is generated and used to define future performance goals, strategy, and plan to underpin the strategy. Delivery of this plan is achieved utilizing the **4 P's** → product, price, promotion, and place.

Concurrent with implementing the plan is creating a feedback and control system, which provides the knowledge necessary to monitor actual versus planned performance effectively.

## Niche marketing

The Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) sector comprises three firm types.

- Microenterprises → 1 to 9 employees
- Small enterprises → 10 to 49 employees
- Medium enterprises → 50 - 249 employees

A key characteristic of SMEs is limited access to resources, which influences their abilities to implement effective marketing strategies and causes behavior that is very different from their larger counterparts.

A **market niche** is a narrowly defined market containing a small group of customers with highly specialized needs.

Compared to **market segments**, niches tend to be smaller and consequently have a limited scale of market opportunity.

## Entrepreneurship

***Shumpeterian* model** → managers use traditional, conventional approaches in situations where demand is stable and perceived customer needs are clearly understood. Entrepreneurship, in contrast, is most likely to prevail in those circumstances where the market is in disequilibrium and customers have unfulfilled needs.

**Kirzner** → Dynamics of competition push economies towards equilibrium. The entrepreneur changes aspects of the marketing process, thus creating disequilibria that exploit differences between market needs and goods currently offered.

After the Second World War, a somewhat broader view of entrepreneurship emerged.

**Miller (1983)** → **** the extent managers demonstrate entrepreneurial orientation, take risks, favor change, and exploit innovation to obtain a proactive competitive advantage.

💡 **Chaston (2000).** Entrepreneurship is the behavior exhibited by an individual/organization based upon a philosophy of challenging established operational and organizational conventions to develop new solutions for exploiting opportunities or resolving identified problems.

## The entrepreneur

An entrepreneur is an individual who creates a new product, process, service, or venture by adopting an unconventional approach.

**Brockhaus** and **Horwitz (1985)**. Psychological characteristics of entrepreneurs

1. Need for achievement → wishing to be a successful business person
2. Internal locus of control → reflected by the entrepreneur believing that any significant event within the business results from their behavior.
3. **Propensity to take risks* → research evidence is contradictory
4. **Approach to problem solving and creativity* → again, conflicting results
5. High tolerance for ambiguity →, accepting that uncertainty is normal in business life.
6. Personal value system → concrete thinker concerned with immediate problems and operations of the business.

## Intrapreneurship

"The activity of individuals engaged in proactive innovation on behalf of an existing operation." - Pinchot (1985)

Eesley and Longnececker's (2006) guidelines for the management of **intrapreneurship** in large firms

1. A **culture of** work force **empowerment** and **action**.
2. Celebrating and **rewarding** **ideas**, **progress** and **results**.
3. **Free-flowing** customer information and internal **communications**.
4. **Management support** and **engagement** of employees **at all levels**.
5. Ongoing **encouragement** and promotion of **risk taking** and new ideas.
6. Developing **processes** for **idea** generation and advancement.
7. Clearly **defined** organizational **needs**, **vision** and **direction**.
8. Developing better **cooperation** and **teamwork**.
9. Providing **resources** to create and **support** new ideas.
10. **Cross training** and **special assignments**.

**SME Intrapreneurship** is different

- Friendlier, more flexible structures →, more accessible convergence of intrapreneur's ideas and owner perspective.
- **SME strategic process is contingency-based**, as opposed to deterministic like in large firms.

**Intrapreneurship** === **Corporate_Entrepreneurship**

**Block and MacMillan (1995)**

*"the processes associated with **evaluating**, **selecting** and **organizing** entrepreneurial opportunities as the basis for developing innovative goods and services more suited to rapidly responding to changing and highly turbulent business environments."*

## The marketing entrepreneurship interface

**Entrepreneurial marketing** is concerned with innovation and new opportunities driven by the aim of creating imbalances that alter existing market dynamics." - Hills (2010)

## Entrepreneurial marketing

**Eight** **key characteristics** associated with successfully implementing an "entrepreneurial marketing philosophy."

1. Move away from a **reactive** to a **proactive** orientation:
Perceiving changing external environments offers new opportunities to grow and expand
2. 'Opportunity-driven' organizational culture:
Heightened awareness of utilizing external environments as a source of discovery and learning which can provide the basis for adapting and evolving future activities.
3. The **critical outcome** of these activities is that they result in 'value creation
    1. Offering enhanced value to the customer
    2. Increasing value-added activities inside the organization.

1. **Customer intensity**. To achieve a focus on **adaptation** and **learning**
    1. Ensures the focus is on meeting new or existing customer needs
    2. Aim is to build relationships that enhance the experience
2. Strong **innovation focus**. Exploiting innovation to achieve new and greater customer satisfaction.
3. **Innovation** and **change** culture and internal environment, 'willingness to change.'
4. Effective **risk management** instilled in the workforce by management.
5. **Resource leveraging**. Resource leveraging involves creating new relationships through alliances and networks with other organizations that can provide the necessary resources.

## Rational entrepreneurial marketing

☝ Successful entrepreneurs make little use of formalized management theories.

### Henry Mintzberg's (1987) 'Management by Crafting' Philosophy

Actions flow from an intuitive selection of appropriate action based on a deep commitment and understanding of the business.

### The rational entrepreneurship model

🧐 Entrepreneurial marketing is concerned with challenging conventions.

→ The entry point is determining conventions

→ Assess whether sustaining current market conventions can deliver future performance goals.

Only where it is unfeasible should an entrepreneurial marketing orientation be considered.

**Central** to rational entrepreneurial marketing → the systematic analysis of situations, evaluating alternative actions, and defining appropriate action rules.

**Three important guidelines**

1. Analysis should not be so extensive that the volume of generated data overcomplicates the activity to the point that reaching a final decision is impossible.
2. Knowledge gained through experience should become the basis for learning how to become a more **effective** decision-maker in the future.
3. Where the individual(s) **does not feel comfortable** **with** the solution generated by **rational analysis**, should be willing to rely on **intuition**.

## Sectorial conventions

The strategic rules which guide the marketing operations of most firms in a sector of industry.

## Performance conventions

In the private sector, managers are charged by financial stakeholders with generating profits sufficient to ensure an adequate return on the organization's assets (total revenue, gross margin, the total value added p/employee, return on working capital, and ROI on fixed assets).

The 'best-in-class firms usually set the accepted performance standard within an industrial sector because market achievements are the basis against which they and their competitors are judged. But, similar to strategic conventions, these will also change over time.

**Kaizen**. The Japanese philosophy of assessing one's manufacturing process against intra- and inter-sectoral standards.

## Customer conventions

All organizations are in the business of seeking to satisfy the needs of their customers. Customer needs are rooted in the fundamental benefits provided by a product or service.

Customers acquire **minimum standard** expectations. These expectations form the conventions against which the market performance of a supplier is judged.

Breach of conventions deemed critical by the purchaser will result in the customer switching allegiances.

☝ **Buyer behavior is an extremely complex subject**.

Similar to **strategic** and **performance** conventions, **customer** conventions change over time due to the effect of prior purchasing experience of changing industrial sector circumstances.

## Technological conventions

When there is confidence that current process technologies will remain appropriate for the foreseeable future, the organization will focus on sustaining performance by exploiting conventional marketing strategies.

**The alternative** is to examine opportunities to break with existing conventions and seek market superiority by introducing new technology.

The other opportunity offered by breaking technological conventions is that it can provide the basis for attracting new customers in existing markets or provide the basis for totally new markets.

## Market success factors

Factors that are known to be critical in terms of deciding success or failure. Where an organization can achieve a high rating for those factors, it can be expected to outperform competitors who lack specific key competencies.

**Three sources of influence** determining critical market success factors are the conventions specified by **strategy**, **sector performance** and **customers**. If the non-entrepreneurial firm wishes to outperform the competition, it must be able to meet these conventions.

**The alternative** → one or more firms decide that competing based on matching the behavior of others is less impactful than adopting an entrepreneurial approach.

