---
title: "Understanding the Customer"
date: "2023-03-12"
categories: 
  - "Entrepreneurial marketing"
  - "MBA"
---

## Understanding the Customer

The entrepreneur needs to focus both on the customer and the competition. The customer is the business's primary concern, and the competition is the external environment within which the company must operate.

Customer behavior involves both the **physical** and **mental** behavior of individuals in the marketplace. It includes:

- Pre-purchase behavior
- Purchase behavior
- Post-purchase behavior

The stages a customer goes through in making choices about which products and services to buy are called the **purchase decision process** and consist of **five stages**

1. Problem recognition
2. Information search
3. Alternative evaluation
4. Purchase decision
5. Post-purchase behavior

The customer is also affected by psychological, sociocultural, situational, and marketing mix influences.

### Psychological Influences

Psychological influences affect why and how customers behave regarding their purchase behavior. The entrepreneur must be aware of psychological influences include personality/lifestyle, motivation, learning, perception, attitudes, and involvement.

### Personality/Lifestyle

**Personality** refers to a person's consistent behaviors or responses to recurring situations. Although numerous personality theories exist, most identify key traits —enduring characteristics within a person or their relationships.

**Lifestyle** is a mode of living identified by how people spend their time and resources, what they consider important in their environment, and what they think of themselves and the world around them. The analysis of consumer lifestyles, called psychographics, has produced many insights into customer behavior.

### Motivation

Motivation is the force that causes us to act, including satisfying a need.

### Learning

**Learning** is the process in which behavior capabilities change due to experience.

**Behavioral learning** is developing automatic responses to a situation built up through repeated exposure.

**Cognitive learning** involves connecting two or more ideas or simply observing the outcomes of others' behaviors and adjusting your own accordingly. Entrepreneurial firms can influence this learning through repetition in advertising.

### Perception

Perception is the process by which we select, organize, and interpret stimuli.

### Attitudes

Attitudes are "learned predispositions" to respond to an object or class of objects in a consistently favorable or unfavorable way.

### Involvement

Involvement is the degree to which something is central to your sense of self and the purchase's personal, social, and economic significance to the customer.

### Sociocultural Influences

Sociocultural differences involve the customer's formal and informal relationships with others, which can affect the customer's purchase behavior. Sociocultural influences include demographics, culture/subculture, social class, reference groups, and personal influences.

#### Demographics

Demographics describes a population according to several characteristics such as age, gender, income, education, occupation, marital status, population size, and population growth rate.

#### Culture/Subculture

Culture incorporates a society's values, customs, traditions, ideas, and attitudes and transmits from one generation to the next. Subgroups within the larger, or national, culture with unique values, ideas, and attitudes are called **subcultures**.

#### Cultural Rituals

Cultural rituals are highly expressive, symbolic, and episodic behavior patterns.

#### Social Class

People group themselves into relatively permanent, homogeneous divisions in society called social classes based on their similar values, interests, and behavior. The occupation, source of income (not level of income), and a person's education determine their social class.

#### Reference Groups

Reference groups are people an individual looks at as a basis for self-appraisal or as a source of personal standards. Reference groups affect customers' purchases by influencing the information, attitudes, and aspiration levels that help set a customer's standards.

#### Personal Influences

Personal influences are the views, opinions, or behaviors of others that affect a customer's purchases. Two aspects of personal influence are important to entrepreneurial marketing: opinion leadership and word-of-mouth activity.

#### Situational Influences

Situational influences include the purchase task, social surroundings, physical surroundings, temporal effects, and antecedent states.

#### Marketing Mix Influences

Marketing mix influences are either the 5Ps of a product—based venture or the 8Ps of a service-based venture.

## Business Customers

Business customers include all the buyers in a nation except the ultimate (final) customers. Business customers include manufacturers, retailers, and government agencies that buy goods and services for their use or resale.

### Key Differences and Key Similarities

### Business Buying Criteria

### The Buying Center

The buying center is the group of people in a business organization participating in the buying process.

## Understanding Competition

Competition. Alternatives that could satisfy a specific customer's needs.

Competition continuum refers to the fact that there is no such thing as "no competition" because competition runs on a continuum ranging from indirect to direct.

## Key Takeaways

- Remember that behind every purchase is a customer you must understand fully.
- Take the time to examine the psychological, sociocultural, and situational influences that affect customer purchase behavior and plan accordingly.
- Remember that you can influence the customer with your marketing mix.
- Knowing the customer will allow you to construct the proper marketing mix.
- There are opportunities in the market to cater to final customers (B2C marketing) and business customers (B2B marketing).
- Customers may be the essence of why your business might exist, but the competition is your atmosphere.
- Know your competitors and benchmark against them. But importantly, find a way to compete on your terms.